--- PAGE 1 ---
Effect of Transcutaneous Electrical 
Nerve Stimulation for Pain 
Relief on Patients 
Undergoing Hernorrhoidectomy 
Prospective, Randomized, Controlled Trial 
Jen-Hwey Chiu, M.D., Ph.D.,*,'~ Wei-Shone Chen, M.D., Ph.D.,~: 
Chern-Hsin Chen, M.D.,~: Jeng-Kae Jiang, M.D.,:~ Gau-Jun Tang, M.D.,~ 
Wing-Yiu Lui, M.D., Ph.D.,*[] Jen-Kuo Lin, M.D., Ph.D.# 
From the *Institute of Traditional Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, ~Division of 
General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Veterans General IIospital, ~Division of Colorectal Surgery, 
Department of Surgery, Veterans General Hospital, ~Department of Anesthesiology, Veterans General 
Hospital, and the IlDepartment of Surgery, School o/'Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, 
Taipei, Taiwan 
PURPOSE: Posthemorrhoidectomy pain control remains a 
challenging problem. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stim- 
ulation is known to be effective in the treatment of many 
diseases. Our aim was to investigate the effect of transcuta- 
neous electrical nerve stimulation on pain relief in patients 
undergoing hemorrhoidectomy. METHODS: Sixty patients 
with symptomatic hemorrhoids were randomly allocated 
into two groups, the acupoint group (n = 30) and the 
nonpoint control group (n = 30). Transcutaneous electrical 
nerve stimulation was applied to those patients who re- 
ceived hemorrhoidectomy, and patient-controlled analgesia 
was achieved by injection of morphine through ambulatory 
infusion pumps. The dependent measures in this study 
were pain score from 0 (no pain) to 10 (agonizing pain), 
analgesic doses administrated through patient-controlled 
analgesia, and postoperative complications. RESULTS: The 
subjective pain scores evaluated 8, 12, 16, and 24 hours 
after hemorrhoidectomy in the control group and the acu- 
point group were 5.9 -+ 0.5 and 4.1 -+ 0.5, 5.7 ± 0.5 and 
3.5 + 0.4, 4.1 + 0.4 and 2.3 + 0.3, and 3.2 + 0.4 and 1.9 + 
0.2, respectively (two-way analysis of variance; P < 0.05). 
There was a significant difference between treatment 
groups in morphine use, with 11.6 + 2.2 mg in the control 
group and 6.2 _+ 1.3 mg in the acupoint group (P < 0.05). 
The acupoint group tended to have less postoperative acute 
urinary retention (Fisher's exact probability test; P = 0.145) 
and less need for 'analgesics than the control group (P = 
0.112, Fisher's exact test). CONCLUSION: Transcutaneous 
electrical nerve stimulation is effective for pain relief in 
patients receiving hemorrhoidectomy. Its efficacy and 
safety could assist outpatient pain management after hem- 
orrhoidectomy. [Key words: Transcutaneous electrical 
Supported by a grant from the National Research Institute of Chi- 
nese Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. 
Address reprint requests to Dr. J.H. Chiu: Division of General 
Surgery, Department of Surgery, Veterans General Hospital, # 201, 
Sec. 2, Shih-pei Rd, Taipei, Taiwan. 
nerve stimulation; Hemorrhoidectomy; Analgesia; Pain re- 
lief; Acupuncture] 
Chin J-H, Chen W-S, Chert C-H, Jiang J-K, Tang G-J, Lui W-Y, 
Lin J-K. Effect of transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation 
for pain relief on patients undergoing hemorrhoidectomy: 
prospective, randomized, controlled trial. Dis Colon Rec- 
tum 1999;42:180-185. 
H 
emorrhoid is a common disease worldwide and 
causes symptoms in 4.4 percent of the popula- 
tion. 1 Among several modalities studied for the treat- 
ment of hemorrhoids, surgical resection seems effec- 
tive in eradicating the symptoms about which patients 
complain. ~ However, agonizing postoperative pain 
and thus the need of hospitalization for pain relief 
remains the major drawback for a patient undergoing 
hemorrhoidectomy. 3 Several interventions, for exam- 
ple, transdermal deliveI T of fentanyt, intraoperative 
use of Toradol ® (Syntex Laboratories, Pato Alto, CA), 
and use of a subcutaneous morphine pump, have 
been used to relieve postoperative pain after hemor- 
rhoidectomy. ~-6 Nevertheless, the results are unsatis- 
factory. 
Several large-scaled, randomized, controlled trials 
and meta-analysis of the clinical trials have demon- 
strated the effectiveness of acupuncture in relieving 
pain, in improving the breathing difficulties of chronic 
pulmonary diseases, in reducing symptoms of nausea 
in pregnancy, and in improving the functional out- 
come in cerebral infarction. 7-~° Thanks to the rapid 
advance in studies on the endogenous opioid system, 
180 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Vol. 42, No. 2 TENS FOR POSTHEMORRHOIDECTOMY PAIN 181 
acupuncture analgesia (AA) or electroacupuncture 
analgesia (EA) are now, known to result from the 
mobilization of specific neuropeptides by peripheral 
stimulation of identified frequencies. 11 
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) 
is peripheral stimulation via electrodes applied to the 
skin used as a medicat procedure for health care and 
pain control. 12 Several lines of evidence suggest a 
similar effect in TENS and electroacupuncture. 11 
Moreover, TENS has been shown to relax the lower 
esophageal sphincter in patients with achalasia and to 
relax the sphincter of Oddi in patients with biliary 
dyskinesia.~3, i4 Because present management meth- 
ods for posthemorrhoidectomy pain remain unsatis- 
factory, the effect of TENS for pain relief on patients 
undergoing hemorrhoidectomy is worth investiga- 
tion. 
PATIENTS AND METHODS 
Sixty consecutive patients with symptomatic 
hemorrhoids, Grade II to IV, were eligible for sur- 
gical resection of the hemorrhoids. Patients with 
chronic liver insufficiency (serum bilirubin >2.0 
mg/dl), massive ascites, chronic renal insufficiency 
(serum creatinine >1.5 mg/dl), pregnancy, involve- 
ment of colorectal cancer, history of bleeding, long- 
term analgesic intake, cardiac arrhythmia, and 
pacemaker implantation were excluded from the 
study. Under regulations of the Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei and in accordance with the stan- 
dards of the committee on human experimentation, 
patients giving informed consent were prospec- 
tively assigned to two groups as described below. 
Surgical procedures, including one to three wedge 
resection(s) of the hemorrhoids, were standardized 
and performed by a single surgical team. Perioper- 
ative prescriptions for hemorrhoidectomy included 
preoperative sedation (diazepam, t0 mg intramus- 
cularly), intraoperative perineal anesthesia with 30 
ml of a mixture of 0.25 percent Marcaine TM (bupiv- 
acaine, Winthrop Pharmaceuticals, New York, NY), 
with units of epinephrine at 1:200,000 and two 
amputes of Wydase TM (hyaluronidase; Wyerst-Ay- 
erth Laboratories, Philadelphia, PA). Management 
of perioperative dehydration (no intravenous fluid 
supplement) was prescribed to avoid acute urinary 
retention induced by volumes. After the operation, 
patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) was adminis- 
tered by an ambulatory infusion pump (model 
5800, Pharmacia Dettec, Inc., St. Paul, MN) admin- 
istering morphine intravenously. A bolus dose of 2 
mg of morphine sulfate was given, followed by 
patient-controlled bolus doses of 0.5 mg every six 
hours. The PCA ambulatory infusion pump was 
programmed to administer bolus doses with a lock- 
out feature to prevent overdosing. For ethical 
reason, in addition to PCA a suboptimal dose of 
additional analgesics (meperidine, 20 mg intramus- 
cularly) was given whenever the postoperative pain 
became intolerable and the patient called the nurse 
for further management. This dose was not enough 
for adequate pain relief, so that it was feasible to 
evaluate the usefulness of postoperative TENS. 
The dependent measures in this study were pain 
score, analgesic doses administered through the ambu- 
latory infusion pump, frequency of the nurse being 
called for analgesics, and complications such as acute 
urinary retention. Postoperative pain was measured 
with a visual analog scale from 0 (no pain) to 10 (ago- 
nizing pain). Patients were asked to rate their pain on 
this scale 6, 12, 18, and 24 hours after hemorrhoidec- 
tomy. The total dosage of morphine used in PCA and the 
number of nurse calls for analgesics were recorded. 
Study Design 
The patients were randomly assigned by selection 
from a random number table into the acupoint group 
and the nonpoint control group. In both circum- 
stances the same supportive postoperative treatment, 
including stool softeners and standard postoperative 
care, were prescribed. In the acupoint group, two 
electrodes, according to the guideline of Chinese acu- 
puncture literature, 15 were applied to the skin areas 
on the dorsal web between the first and the second 
metacarpal bones (Hegu, Large Intestine meridian, 
4th ampoint, negative electrode) and on the radial 
side 3 cm proximal to the wrist crease (Lieque, Lung 
meridan, 7th ampoint, positive electrode) of the same 
hand. In the nonpoint group or control group, two 
disposable electrodes were applied to the skin areas 
on the ulnar border of the hypothenar muscle as 
shown in Figure 1. Transcutaneous electrical nerve 
stimulation (TENS) from a pocket stimulator (Han 
Acutens, WQ1002F, Beijing, China) 12 was given two 
times per day. The stimulation was pulse-waved with 
frequency alternating beween 2 and 100 Hz, 300/xsec 
pulse duration and a 30-minute stimulation duration. 
The intensity was adjusted until rhythmic flexion of 
thumb and index finger was obtained without pro- 
ducing pain, usually at 20 to 30 mA. 

--- PAGE 3 ---
182 CHIU ETAL Dis Colon Rectum, February 1999 
acupoints 
~ negative electrode 
control points ~ ''~ 
negatwe electrode 
positive electrode 
Figure 1. Electrode placement with transcutaneous elec- 
trical nerve stimulation (TENS). Two groups were ran- 
domized and evaluated. In the acupoint group two elec- 
trodes were applied to skin areas on the dorsal web 
between the first and second metacarpal bones (negative 
electrode) and on the radial side 3 cm proximal to the 
wrist crease (positive electrode) of the same hand. In the 
nonpoint, or control group, two electrodes were applied 
to skin areas on the ulnar border of the hypothenar mus- 
cle. 
Statistics 
Data were expressed as means + standard error of 
the mean. The homogeneity of the studied group 
(acupoint group) and control group (nonpoint group) 
was analyzed with the Wilcoxon rank sum test for 
continuous variables and Fisher's exact probability 
test for noncontinuous variables. Severity of postop- 
erative pain was measured in terms of pain score 
(0-10) at successive time intervals after hemorrhoid- 
ectomy. Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was 
used to test the significance of differences between 
acupoint and control groups. Two-way ANOVA with 
repeated measures (Manova) on the time factor was 
performed by use of the general linear models pro- 
cedure (SAS ® biostatistical package program, SAS In- 
stitute, Inc., Cary, NC). Dosages of analgesics used for 
PCA in the treatment groups were compared with 
Wilcoxon rank sum test. A two-tailed P value <0.05 
was defined as statistically significant. 
RESULTS 
There were no dropouts or deaths during the pe- 
riod of hospitalization. The study was easily feasible; 
the availability of patients, their acceptance of the 
study procedures, and physician cooperation pre- 
sented no difficulties. Comparison of patient charac- 
teristics, including age, gender, grading of hemor- 
rhoids, and operative procedure (Table 1) showed no 
statistically significant differences between acupoint 
and control groups (P > 0.05). 
Table 1. 
Demographic Characteristics in Patients Treated with 
Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation 
After Hemorrhoidectomy 
Acupoint Control 
Variables No. Group Group P Value 
(n = 30) (n = 30) 
Age (yr)* 60 53.1 + 2.7 56.0 + 3.1 P = 0.481 
Gender P = 0.233 
Mate 45 20 25 
Female 15 10 5 
Grade P = 1.000 
II 35 17 18 
III + IV 25 13 12 
Operation P = 0.368 
One wedge 10 5 5 
Two wedges 25 15 10 
Three wedges 25 10 15 
Figures are number of patients unless otherwise indi- 
cated. 
* Data were expressed as means + standard error of 
the mean. The homogeneity of the studied group (acu- 
point group) and control group (nonpoint group) was 
analyzed with Wilcoxon rank-sum test for age and Fish- 
er's exact probability test for gender, grade, and opera- 
tion. 
The subjective complaint of pain after hemorrhoid- 
ectomy was evaluated by patients and scored with 
pain level from 0 (no pain) to 10 (agonizing pain). 
The pain level in the control group and the acupoint 
group evaluated 8, 12, 16, and 24 hours after opera- 
tion was 5.9 + 0.5 and 4.1 + 0.5, 5.7 + 0.5 and 3.5 -+ 
0.4, 4.1 _+ 0.4 and 2.3 + 0.3, and 3.2 + 0.4 and 1.9 -+ 
0.2, respectively (Fig. 2). The difference between 
treatment groups was statistically significant (two-way 
ANOVA, P < 0.0005). The analgesic dose needed 
through PCA after hemorrhoidectomy also showed a 
significant difference between treatment groups, with 
11.6 _+ 2.2 mg of morphine needed in the control 
group and 6.2 -+ 1.3 mg of morphine needed in the 
acupoint group (P = 0.016; Fig. 3). 
With regard to the surgical outcomes after hemor- 
rhoidectomy, acute urinary retention was noticed in 7 
of 30 patients in the control group and 2 of 30 patients 
in the acupoint group (Fisher's exact probability test; 
P = 0.145). The frequency of nurse calls for analgesics 
was 4 of 30 patients in the control group and 0 of 30 
patients in the acupoint group (Fisher's exact proba- 
bility test; P = 0.112; "Fable 2). No complications 
associated with use of the TENS device, such as con- 
tact dermatitis, arrhythmia, or heart attack, were de- 
tected. There were no significant differences in hos- 

--- PAGE 4 ---
Vol. 42, No. 2 TENS FOR POSTHEMORRHOIDECTOMY PAIN 183 
10 
(3.) 
t-- ,4 
Q_ 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 ~ 
8 12 16 24 
Postoperative time (hrs) 
Figure 2. Pain score ratings in groups treated with transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS). The subjective 
complaint of pain in patients of the control (O) and acupoint (0) groups after hemorrhoidectomy is shown at intervals 
of 8, 12, 16, and 24 hours after operation. Pain level was scored from 0 (no pain) to 10 (agonizing pain). 
E v 
c- 
r- 
9 
o 
14 
12 
10 
T 
i 
Acupoint 
 /JA 
i 
Control 
Figure 3. Intravenous morphine given through a patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) pump in groups treated with 
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS). Asterisk indicates a statistically significant difference between 
acupoint and control groups. ([~ = control group; (I-I) = acupoint group. 
pital stay, with 3.5 -+ 0.9 days for the control group 
and 3.9 + 1.5 days for the acupoint group. 
DISCUSSION 
We used TENS to treat posthemorrhoidectomy pain 
in a prospective, randomized, controlled fashion. To 
our knowledge this is the first controlled study of the 
use of TENS with patients undergoing hemorrhoidec- 
tomy. Most Chinese people trust traditional Chinese 
medicine (TCM), including acupuncture and medici- 
nal herbs. Therefore, there were no dropouts or 
deaths during the period of hospitalization nor com- 

--- PAGE 5 ---
184 CHIU ETAL Dis Colon Rectum, February 1999 
Table 2, 
Surgical Outcomes in Patients Treated with 
Transcutaneous Electrical Nerve Stimulation 
After Hemorrhoidectomy 
No. 
Acupoint Control 
Group Group 
(n =30) (n =30) 
P Value 
AUR 
(-) 5t 28 23 
(+) 9 2 7 
Calls for analgesics 
(-) 56 30 26 
(+) 4 0 4 
P = 0.145 
P = 0.112 
AUR = Acute urinary retention. 
Data were expressed as means _+ standard error of the 
mean. The homogeneity of the studied group (acupoint 
group) and control group (nonpoint group) was analyzed 
with Fisher's exact probability test. Figures are number of 
patients unless otherwise indicated. 
munication difficulties between patients and physi- 
cians. 
It was not until recently that the efficacy and safety 
of acupuncture for treatment of many kinds of dis- 
eases were proved. Acupuncture and moxibustion 
have been recommended by the World Health Orga- 
nization for the treatment of 43 disorders, including 
respiratory tract, gastrointestinal, and neuromuscular 
disorders. ~6 Several recent studies, including those 
making use of meta-analysis, have pointed out that a 
prospective, randomized, controlled design is critical 
for studies to reach solid conclusions concerning the 
efficacy of acupuncture treatment, v, s, i7 In this study 
the sham point (Fig. 1) was chosen because few 
acupoints have been mentioned in the literature of 
TCM or had their therapeutic effect tried in TCM. 
Therefore, this study was intended to provide a 
needed prospective, randomized, controlled trial. An- 
algesic effects might be evident in patients who re- 
ceive nonpoint TENS if compared with patients with- 
out TENS (sham TENS) treatment. However, for 
ethical reasons there was no sham TENS control 
group in this study, because severe pain occurs with- 
out exception after hemorrhoidectomy. Nevertheless, 
our results showed obvious pain relief by TENS on 
true acupoints after hemorrhoidectomy compared 
with TENS on sham points. 
Many clinical trials have shown that acupuncture is 
effective in pain reliefT, i8 Thanks to rapid advances 
in the study of the endogenous opioid system, acu- 
puncture analgesia (AA) and electroacupuncture an- 
algesia (EA) are now known to result from mobiliza- 
tion of specific neuropeptides by peripheral 
stimulation with identified frequencies. 11 Central neu- 
rotransmitters such as 13-endorphin, enkephalin, and 
dynorphin can be released by peripheral electroacu- 
punctural stimulation with frequency of 2 , 15, and 
100 Hz, respectively. ~2° TENS is an alternate device 
similar to acupuncture and electroacupuncture. It 
provides almost the same therapeutic effect, espe- 
cially for pain relief, as does the electroacupuncture. 
Furthermore, differential release of human central 
peptide from preproenkephalin and preprodynor- 
phin has been reported via TENS used with a different 
frequencies to sustain the pain-relieving effect, lz 
In addition to scientific proof of the efficacy of 
TENS for treatment of acute, chronic, and labor or 
delivery pain, 21, 22 several studies have shown that 
TENS relaxes the lower esophageal sphincter in pa- 
tients with achalasia and relaxes the sphincter of Oddi 
in patients with biliary dyskinesia. 13, 14 The increased 
concentration of central opioids and serum vasoactive 
intestinal peptide (VIP) level suggests that TENS may 
stimulate the release of either central or peripheral 
neurotransmitters. 
Although acupuncture is generally safe with the use 
of needles, fatal complications such as hemopericar- 
dium have been reported. 23 However, TENS is a non- 
invasive device without needle puncture and thus 
avoids unnecessary complications. In this study no 
TENS-related complications, such as cardiac arrhyth- 
mia, palpitation, or contact dermatitis were noticed. 
Furthermore, the cost per person for disposable elec- 
trodes was less than one United States dollar, and 
these electrodes could be reused on the same person. 
In summary, TENS is a device that is easily applied, 
and its efficacy and safety could assist in pain relief for 
outpatients receiving hemorrhoidectomy. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors thank Miss LJ. Tai and H.L. Kao for 
their technical and statistical assistance. 
REFERENCES 
1. Johanson JF, Sonnenberg A. The prevalence of hemor- 
rhoids and chronic constipation: an epidemiologic 
study. Gastroenterology 1990;98:380-6. 
2. MacRae HM, McLeod RS. Comparison of hemorrhoidal 
treatment modalities: meta-analysis. Dis Colon Rectum 
1995;38:687-94. 
3. Kilbride M, Morse M, Senagore A. Transdermal fentanyl 
improves management of postoperative hemorrhoidec- 
tomy pain. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:1070-2. 
4. Gourtay GK, Kowalski SR, Plummer JL. The efficacy of 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Vol. 42, No. 2 TENS FOR POSTHEMORRHOIDECTOMY PAIN 185 
transdermal fentanyl in the treatment of postoperative 
pain: double-blind comparison of fentanyl and placebo 
systems. Pain 1990;40:21-8. 
5. O'Donovan S, Ferrara A, Larach S, Williamson P. Intra- 
operative use of Toradol ® facilitates outpatient hemor- 
rhoidectomy. Dis Colon Rectum 1994;37:793-9. 
6. Goldstein ET, Wiltiamson PR, Larach SW. Subcutaneous 
morphine pump for postoperative hemorrhoidectorny 
pain management. Dis Colon Rectum 1993;36:439-46. 
7. ter Riet G, Kleijnen J, Knipschild P. Acupuncture and 
chronic pain: criteria-based meta-analysis. J Ctin Epide- 
miol 1990;43:1191-9. 
8. Jobst KA. A critical analysis of acupuncture in pulmo- 
nary disease: efficacy and safety of the acupuncture 
needle. J Altem Complement Med 1995;1:57-85. 
9. Vickers AJ. Can acupuncture have specific effects on 
health? A systematic review of acupuncture antiemesis 
trials. J R Soc Med 1996;89:303-11. 
10. Johansson K, Lindgren I, Widner H, Wiklund I, 
Johansson BB. Can sensory stimulation improve the 
functional outcome in stroke patients? Neurology 1993; 
43:2189-92. 
11. HanJS, Wang Q. Mobilization ofspecific neuropeptides 
by peripheral stimulation of identified frequencies. 
NIPS 1992;7:176-80. 
12. Han JS, Chen XH, Sun SL, et aL Effect of low-- and 
high-frequency TENS on met-enkephalin-Arg-Phe and 
dynorphin A immunoreactivity in human lumbar CSF. 
Pain 1991;47:295-8. 
13. Kaada B. Successful treatment of esophageal dysmotil- 
ity and Raynaud's phenomenon in systemic sclerosis 
and achalasia by transcutaneous nerve stimulation: in- 
crease in plasma VIP concentration. Scand J Gastroen- 
terol 1987;22:1137~i6. 
14. Guelmd M, Rossiter A, Souney PF, Mendoza S, Mujica 
V. The effect of transcutaneous nerve stimulation on 
sphincter of Oddi pressure in patients with biliary dys- 
kinesia. Am J Gastroenterol 1991;86:581-5. 
15. Cheng XN. Chinese acupuncture and moxibustion. Bei- 
jing: Foreign Language Press, 1987. 
16. World Health. Acupuncture and Moxibustion. World 
Health Organization Feb. 1980 
17. Kleijnen J, ter Riet G, Knipschild P. Acupuncture and 
asthma: a review of controlled trials. Thorax 1991;46: 
799-802. 
18. Femades L, Berry H, Clark RJ. Clinical study comparing 
acupuncture, physiotherapy, injection, and oral anti- 
inflammatory therapy in shoulder-cuff lesions. Lancet 
1980;1:208--9. 
19. LinJG, Chen XH, HanJS. Antinociception produced by 
2 and 5 KHz peripheral stimulation in the rat. Int J Neu- 
rosci 1992;64:15-22. 
20. Wen HL, Mehal ZD, Ong BH, Ho WK, Wen DY. Intra- 
thecal administration of beta-endorphin and 
dynorphin-(1-13) for the treatn:ent of intractable pain. 
Life Sci 1985;37:1220--31. 
21. Reeve J, Menon D, Corabian P. Transcutaneous electri- 
cal nerve stimulation (TENS): a technology assessment. 
Intern J Technol Assess Health Care 1996;12:299-324. 
22. Taub E, Munz M, Tasker RR. Chronic electrical stimula- 
tion of the gasserian ganglion for the relieve of pain in 
a series of 34 patients. J Neurosurg 1997;86:197-202. 
23. Cameiro NM, Li SM. Acupuncture technique. Lancet 
1995;345:1577. 
