--- PAGE 1 ---
V ol. 78 - No. 8 MINERV A ANESTESIOLOGICA 887
O R I G I N A L  A R T I C L E
Anno: 2012
Mese: August
V olume: 78
No: 8
Rivista: MINERV A ANESTESIOLOGICA
Cod Rivista: Minerva Anestesiol
Lavoro: 
titolo breve: Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation on acupoints
primo autore: LAN
pagine: 887-95
A
cute postoperative pain is a challenge to 
clinicians for postoperative care, especially 
in elderly patients with comorbidities such as 
coronary heart disease. Elderly patients under-
going total hip arthroplasty (THA) frequently 
experience high levels of postoperative pain. 1, 2 
If postoperative pain is not managed effectively 
in these patients, postoperative complications  
such as myocardial ischemia, pulmonary atel-
ectasis and postoperative cognitive dysfunction 
(POCD) 3-6 may develop as pain and its associat-
ed pathological changes will be harmful for our 
body and organs to be functional normally. The 
use of patient-controlled intravenous analgesia 
(PCA) is considered to be safe and efficient for 
elderly patients.7 However, PCA could not only 
T ranscutaneous electrical nerve stimulation 
on acupoints reduces fentanyl requirement 
for postoperative pain relief after total 
hip arthroplasty in elderly patients
F . LAN 1, Y.-H. MA 1, J.-X. XUE 1, T.-L. WANG 1, D.-Q. MA 2
1Department of Anesthesiology, Xuan Wu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China; 2Anesthetics, Pain 
Medicine and Intensive Care, Department of Surgery and Cancer, Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, Imperial College 
London, London, UK
A B S T R A C T
Background. T ranscutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) is regarded as an effective treatment for vari-
ous types of pain. However, no randomized controlled trial has investigated TENS on acupoints for postoperative 
analgesia in elderly patients. This study aim to investigate whether TENS on acupoints has any favorable effect on 
complementary analgesia after total hip arthroplasty (THA) for elderly patients compared with a sham control 
treatment.
Methods. Sixty-eight elderly patients requiring THA surgery were enrolled and randomly allocated to one of two 
groups. Group Acu received true TENS on acupoints (bilateral P6, L14; ST36, GB31 ipsilateral to the surgery site) 
and Group Sham received sham treatment. All patients received patient-controlled analgesia for two days postop-
eratively. Analgesia was assessed by postoperative fentanyl requirement and pain intensity using a visual analogue 
scale (VAS-10 cm). The incidence of analgesia-related side effects, optional medication use and effects of patients’ 
blinding were recorded.
Results. Fentanyl consumption in Group Acu was lower than that in Group Sham at 24 h (mean ± SD; 360±117 
vs. 572±132 μg; P<0.001) and 48 h (712±184 vs. 1022±197 μg; P<0.001) after surgery. Postoperative pain intensity 
measured by VAS was similar in both groups. The incidence of opioid-related side effects and rescue medication for 
postoperative analgesia was significantly higher in Group Sham than in Group Acu. Differences between the groups 
regarding the effects of patients’ blinding were not significant.
Conclusion. TENS on specific acupoints is an effective and complementary approach to reduce postoperative anal-
gesic requirement in elderly patients after THA. (Minerva Anestesiol 2012;78:887-95)
Key words: P
ain, postoperative - Analgesia - Arthroplasty, replacement, hip - Elderly.
 
MINERVA MEDICACOPYRIGHT®
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies
(either sporadically or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other
means which may allow access to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is
not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover, overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo ,
or other proprietary information of the Publisher.
--- PAGE 2 ---
LAN TRA NSCUTANEOUS EL ECTRICAL  NE RVE ST IMULATION ON AC UPOINTS
888 MINERV A ANESTESIOLOGICA August 2012
lead to numerous opioid-related side effects such 
as respiratory depression, nausea, vomiting, pru-
ritus and dizziness, but also may increase a risk 
of the POCD, 8 which are potential risk factors 
of postoperative morbidity and even mortality. 9 
Therefore, it is important to explore alternative 
postoperative pain relief strategies for elderly pa-
tients with fewer side effects than those currently 
available.
T ranscutaneous electrical nerve stimulation 
(TENS) has been reported to significantly de-
crease opioid requirements within 24 h postop-
eratively,10 although it can be ineffective in the 
treatment of postoperative acute pain in certain 
cases, including total knee arthroplasty.11 More-
over, TENS treatment on acupoints has better 
pain relief efficacy and can reduce the incidence 
of postoperative nausea and vomiting consider-
ably.10, 12
The aim of the present study was to investi-
gate whether TENS on specific acupoints can 
provide complementary analgesia to reduce the 
requirement for fentanyl PCA and its related 
side effects after THA in elderly patients.
Materials and methods
Study design and randomization
After obtaining Ethics Committee approval 
of Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical Univer-
sity, Beijing, China, 68 elderly patients sched-
uled for THA with combined spinal epidural 
anesthesia (CSEA) were recruited for the study. 
The study was performed at the Departments 
of Anesthesiology and Orthopedics, Xuanwu 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, China, 
from June 2009 to March 2011. Preoperative 
anesthesiologic evaluation and the patients’ ran-
domization for the study were performed the 
day before surgery. After obtaining written in-
formed consent, all patients were divided into 
two groups by use of a computer-generated 
random number table: Group Acu-PCIA plus 
TENS therapy for 30 min before incision, and 
at 2 h, 4 h, 20 h and 44 h after surgery; Group 
Sham (sham control) - P
CIA plus sham TENS 
therapy (all conditions are identical but without 
electrical stimulation).
Patient selection
Patients who are over 65 years old, with an 
ASA Grade I-III scheduled for elective THA for 
hip fracture were recruited in the study. The pa-
tients were excluded if they: 1) had a history of 
acupuncture treatment; 2) were not capable of 
understanding how to use the PCA pump, visual 
analogue scale (VAS) for pain measurement or 
consent form; 3) had a history of alcohol abuse; 
4) had a history of opioid medication; 5) had 
psychiatric illness; 6) suffered from extreme obe-
sity (Body Mass Index>40 kg/m 2); 7) had local 
or systemic infection; 8) or if they had cardiac 
pacemakers.
TENS, sham TENS and specific acupoints
Practicing acupuncturists of at least two 
years’ experience, marked the specific points of 
the patients in both groups the evening before 
surgery (Figure 1). In both groups, six acupoints 
were selected: bilateral P6, L14 (P6: on the an-
terior surface of the forearm, 2-finger widths up 
from the first wrist crease and between the ten-
Figure 1.—Anatomical sites of acupuncture stimulated in the 
study. In both groups, six acupoints were selected: bilateral P6, 
L14 and ipsilateral to the surgery site ST36, GB31. (P6: on the 
anterior surface of the forearm, 2-finger widths up from the 
first wrist crease and between the tendons of flexor carpi radia-
lis and palmaris longus; L14: on the dorsum of hand, between 
the 1st and 2nd metacarpal bones, in the midpoint of 2nd 
metacarpal bone on the radial side; ST36: one finger-breadth 
from the anterior crest of the tibia; GB31: at the junction of 
the lateral 1/3 and medial 2/3 of the distance between the 
greater trochanter of the femur and the hiatus of the sacrum).
P6 P6
Bilateral L14
GB31
ST36
MINERVA MEDICACOPYRIGHT®
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies
(either sporadically or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other
means which may allow access to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is
not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover, overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo ,
or other proprietary information of the Publisher.
--- PAGE 3 ---
TRANSCUTANEOUS  EL ECTRICAL  NE RVE ST IMULATION ON AC UPOINTS LA N
V ol. 78 - No. 8 MINERV
A ANESTESIOLOGICA 889
medication. Electrocardiogram (ECG), pulse 
oxygen saturation (SpO 2), invasive blood pres-
sure and temperature were monitored before an-
esthesia. The patients were injected with 1.5-2 
mL of 0.5% Bupivacaine Hydrochloride into 
the subarachnoid space through the L3/4 in-
tervertebral space, and then an epidural catheter 
was placed in the epidural space and advanced 
3 cm. Combined spinal epidural anaesthesia 
was maintained below T -10 for all patients. All 
patients were not administered 2% lidocaine 
hydrochloride through epidural catheter unless 
spinal anesthesia block did not reach to surgi-
cal requirement level. In order to maintain sta-
ble anesthesia, heart rate (HR) and mean arterial 
pressure of all patients were kept within 20% of 
baseline values with fluid loading and adminis-
tration of vasoactive drugs when necessary. An 
electric heating carpet was placed on the oper-
ating table to maintain body temperature. After 
surgery the epidural catheters were removed, and 
patients were transferred to the orthopedic ward 
and ECG, HR and SpO2 were monitored for 24 
hours.
At the end of operation, the PCA pump 
(Smith Medical MD, Inc - Model 6300-CADD-
Legacy Ambulatory Infusion Pump) with intra-
venous fentanyl (10 mg/mL) was connected to 
the patient for two days and 2 mL fentanyl was 
infused as the initial bolus. The setting of the 
PCA pump was: background infusion 2 mL/h, 
locking time 15 min, PCA 2 mL.
The aim of pain relief after surgery was a pain 
intensity of less than 4 on a 10 visual analogue 
scale (VAS-10cm, where 0=no pain; 10=worst 
pain imaginable). The patients were instructed 
how to use the PCA pump and encouraged to 
press the button every time they experienced 
pain >4 in order to inject the opioid analgesic 
via the pump. If patients still reported inten-
sity of pain >4 on the first postoperative day, 
rescue medication (intramuscular pethidine 
hydrochloride 50 mg) was administered by the 
orthopedic surgeon and registered on the study 
protocol. The Orthopedic Surgery Department 
nurses and the physicians involved in patient 
management were blinded to the group alloca-
tion and had no previous TENS and acupunc-
ture expertise.
dons of flexor carpi radialis and palmaris longus; 
L14: on the dorsum of hand, between the 1 st 
and 2 nd metacarpal bones, in the midpoint of 
2nd metacarpal bone on the radial side) and ip-
silateral to the surgery site ST36, GB31 (ST36: 
one finger-breadth from the anterior crest of 
the tibia; GB31: at the junction of the lateral 
1/3 and medial 2/3 of the distance between the 
greater trochanter of the femur and the hiatus 
of the sacrum). The choice of the specific acu-
points was based on previous clinical studies. 10, 
13, 14 Six cutaneous self-adhesive electrode pads 
(HANS electrodes; Gesun) sized 16 cm 2 were 
attached on the six acupoints marked by the 
acunpuntists. All the electrodes were connected 
to the HANS device (HANS-200B six-channel 
unit; Gesun Medical T echnology CO. L TD, 
Nanjing, PRC) and stimulated in the standard 
dense-and-disperse (D-D) mode at a frequency 
setting of 2/100 Hz (i.e., alternately stimulating 
at 2 Hz and 100 Hz every 3 seconds). The in-
tensity of stimulation was set at 0 mA for group 
Sham and at 9-20 mA for group Acu (depend-
ing on the patient’s ability to tolerate the stimu-
lation). All patients received the stimulation 30 
min before incision and at several time points 
in the 2 days after surgery: at 2 h, 4 h, 20 h 
and 44 h. Patients in both groups were told that 
they may or may not experience the electrical 
stimulation, however, the “in use” light on the 
HANS stimulator was flashing as usual in group 
Sham when it was activated. TENS treatment 
on these acupoints continued for two days af-
ter surgery because the usual period of maximal 
postoperative pain after THA was about two 
days. The duration of patient-controlled analge-
sia via PCA pump for all patients after elective 
THA in our hospital was also two days. Only 
acupunctists who performed TENS were aware 
of patients’ allocation, however, interaction be-
tween the patient and acupuncturist was limited 
to the time required for attaching electrode pads 
on acupoints.
Combined spinal epidural anesthesia, postoperative 
care and PCA
Both groups of patients received combined 
spinal epidural anesthesia (CSEA) without pre-
MINERVA MEDICACOPYRIGHT®
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies
(either sporadically or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other
means which may allow access to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is
not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover, overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo ,
or other proprietary information of the Publisher.
--- PAGE 4 ---
LAN TRA NSCUTANEOUS EL ECTRICAL  NE RVE ST IMULATION ON AC UPOINTS
890 MINERV A ANESTESIOLOGICA August 2012
out rate, we have managed to recruited sixty- 
eight patients in this study.
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 
16.0 (Chicago, IL, USA). The Kolmogorov-
Smirnov test was used to check whether data 
were normally distributed. The normally dis-
tributed continuous data (demographics, fenta-
nyl requirement, pain intensity on VAS-10 cm, 
heart rate and blood pressure) were compared 
using the unpaired Student’s t-test. Chi-square 
test was used to analyze the success of patients’ 
blinding and the incidence of analgesia-related 
side effects. A P value <0.05 was considered a 
statistical significance.
Results
Patient characteristics
Sixty-eight patients who was recruited into 
in this study met the inclusion criteria and were 
randomized. Thirty patients per group had com-
pleted this study and their data were used for final 
data analysis. Their demographic data, duration 
of the surgery and dose of introperative epidural 
local anesthetic was summarized and there was 
no difference between the two groups (T able I). 
Eight patients were withdrawn during the study 
because of: 1) intraoperative complications lead-
ing to general anesthesia (severe bleeding requir-
ing blood transfusion of more than 4 units of 
washed red blood cells and severe cardiovascular 
instability); 2) postoperative cognitive dysfunc-
Outcome measures
The primary outcome of this study was fen-
tanyl comsumption via PCA pump at 24 h af-
ter surgery, but total fentanyl requirement via 
PCA pump within 48 h was also recorded. At 
the same time, the data collected from patients 
included: 1) pain intensity on VAS-10 cm at rest 
and on movement (turning over to the healthy 
side in the bed) at 8 h, 24 h and 48 h postopera-
tively when they were awake before administra-
tion of rescue medication and two hours later 
after stimulation; 2) Ramsay sedation scale (RSS 
1-6, where 1=anxious and agitated or restless, 
or both; 2=cooperative, oriented and tranquil; 
3=responding to commands only; 4=exhibiting 
brisk response to light glabellar tap or loud audi-
tory stimulus; 5=exhibiting a sluggish response 
to light glabellar tap or loud auditory stimulus; 
6=exhibiting no response) at 24 h, 48 h after 
surgery; 3) the incidence of analgesia-related side 
effects: nausea and vomiting, excessive sedation 
(RSS≥5), dizziness and pruritus; and 4) the fre-
quency of rescue medication for pain relief dur-
ing the two days after surgery. Special intraop-
erative situations such as hypotension, massive 
hemorrhage and hypothermia, duration of the 
surgery and the dosage of epidural local anes-
thetics were recorded. All data were collected by 
the investigator who has no previous knowledge 
concerning TENS and was blinded to the pa-
tients’ group allocation.
Statistical analysis
Intravenous morphine can be converted to 
equivalent intravenous fentanyl by the con-
version table. 15 Therefore the sample size cal-
culated for this study was based on published 
data indicating morphine consumed via PCA 
(mean±SD=39.1±17.9 mg) within 24 h in the 
placebo group in the similar population and sur-
gical setting.16-18 It was estimated that a sample 
size of 27 patients per group would be sufficient 
to detect a difference of 35% between PCA plus 
TENS and PCA plus sham TENS in the total 
morphine consumption within 24 h postopera-
tively for a two-tailed α=0.05 with a study power 
of 0.8. T o account for an anticipated 20% drop-
T able I.—Patients ’ demographic data, duration of anesthesia 
and epidural dosage.
Group Acu (N.=30) Group Sham (N.=30)
Age (y) 76±6 75±5
Weight (kg) 66±12 63±14
Height (cm) 162±8 163±7
Gender (M/F) 14/16 13/17
Withdrawn (M/F) 1/2 2/3
Duration of 
anesthesia (min)
122±30 124±22
Dosage of epidural 170±25.8 173±11.5
Local anesthetics (mg)
There was no difference between two groups in patients’ demographic, 
duration of anesthesia and dosage of epidural lidocaine hydrochloride. 
Data are mean ± SD or number of patients. Group Acu: PCA+TENS 
on acupoints; Group Sham: PCA+Sham TENS on acupoints.
MINERVA MEDICACOPYRIGHT®
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies
(either sporadically or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other
means which may allow access to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is
not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover, overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo ,
or other proprietary information of the Publisher.
--- PAGE 5 ---
TRANSCUTANEOUS  EL ECTRICAL  NE RVE ST IMULATION ON AC UPOINTS LA N
V ol. 78 - No. 8 MINERV
A ANESTESIOLOGICA 891
Acu and Sham was normally distributed. There 
was no difference in pain intensity on VAS-10 
cm between the two groups at 8 h, 24 h and 48 h 
postoperatively at rest and on movement (Figure 
3). However, Group Acu required 37% and 31% 
less fentanyl than Group Sham at 24 h and 48 h 
after surgery, respectively (Figure 4).
Side effects and rescue medication
Incidence of analgesia-induced side effects 
such as nausea, vomiting and dizziness were sig-
tion (Figure 2). The difference between the two 
groups regarding withdrawal rate was not sta-
tistically significant. Heart rate, respiratory rate 
and blood pressure were similar in both groups 
during surgery and the postoperative monitor-
ing period (data not shown).
Analgesic consumption and pain intensity
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test confirmed that 
the consumption of fentanyl by PCA pump at 
24 and 48 h after surgery for both the Group 
Figure 2.—Patients participated in this study. Sixty-eight patients were recruited and randomized into two groups. During the 
study, two patients in Group Acu and four patients in Group Sham lost to follow-up due to POCD. One patient in Group Acu 
discontinued intervention because of intraoperative severe bleeding, and one patient in Group Sham cease intervention due to 
intraoperative frequent premature ventricular contractions. Ultimately, 30 patients in each group completed this study. POCD: 
postoperative cognitive dysfunction. Group Acu: PCA+TENS on acupoints; Group Sham: PCA+Sham TENS on acupoints.
MINERVA MEDICACOPYRIGHT®
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies
(either sporadically or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other
means which may allow access to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is
not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover, overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo ,
or other proprietary information of the Publisher.
--- PAGE 6 ---
LAN TRA NSCUTANEOUS EL ECTRICAL  NE RVE ST IMULATION ON AC UPOINTS
892 MINERV A ANESTESIOLOGICA August 2012
Success of blinding
T wenty-seven patients in group Acu vs. 24 in 
the Group Sham affirmed that they had experi-
enced true TENS on acupoints and intended to 
receive this method for pain relief in the future 
(T able III). T wo patients from the Group Acu 
and three from the group Sham deemed that 
they received sham TENS. One patient from the 
Group Acu and three patients from the group 
Sham were not sure whether they had experi-
enced the true TENS or sham. The differences 
in success of blinding between the two groups 
were not significant.
nificantly higher in the Group Sham than the 
Group Acu. The incidence of pruritus and exces-
sive sedation were similar in both groups. The 
frequency of rescue medication in group Acu 
was significantly lower than group Sham (T able 
II). There were no TENS-related side effects re-
ported during the study.
Figure 4.—Postoperative fentanyl requirement via PCA pump 
was measured at 24 h and 48 h after surgery. X- and Y-axis in-
dicated different time points and fentanyl requirement postop-
eratively. Compared with Group Sham, fentanyl requirement 
in Group Acu was significantly lower at 24 h and 48 h after sur-
gery. *=P<0.001 (using the unpaired Student’s t-test). Group 
Acu: PCA+TENS on acupoints; Group Sham: PCA+Sham 
TENS on acupoints.
Figure 3.—Intensity of pain was measured at 8 h, 24 h and 48 h after sugery at rest and on movement. X- and Y-axis indicated differ-
ent time points and VAS-10 cm scores postoperatively . A) There was no difference between two groups on pain intensity measured at 
8 h, 24 h and 48 h after surgery at rest; B) there was no difference between two groups on pain intensity measured at 8 h, 24 h and 48 
h on movement postoperatively . Group Acu: PCA+TENS on acupoints; Group Sham: PCA+Sham TENS on acupoints.
0
1
2
3
4
5
8 h after surgery 24 h after surgery 48 h after surgery
A
0
1
2
3
4
6
5
8 h after surgery 24 h after surgery 48 h after surgery
B
Group Acu Group Sham
V AS-Score
V AS-Score
0
1000
1200
200
400
600
800
1400
Fentanyl requirement (μg)
24 h after surgery
*
*
48 h after surgery
Group Acu Group Sham
T able II.—Incidence of opioid related side effects and rescue 
medication.
Side effects Group Acu Group Sham
Nausea 5 (16.7) 14 (46.7)  *
V omiting 3 (10) 10 (32.3) *
Pruritus 3 (10) 4 (13.3)
Dizziness 2 (6.7) 8 (26.7) *
Excessive sedation 1 (3.3) 2 (6.7)
Rescue medication 4 (13.3) 11 (36.7)  *
The incidence of opioid-related side effects and rescue medication for 
postoperative analgesia was significantly higher in Group Sham than in 
Group Acu. Values are numbers of patients (%); *= P<0.05 (using χ2 
test). Group Acu: PCA+TENS on acupoints; Group Sham: PCA+Sham 
TENS on acupoints.
MINERVA MEDICACOPYRIGHT®
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies
(either sporadically or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other
means which may allow access to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is
not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover, overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo ,
or other proprietary information of the Publisher.
--- PAGE 7 ---
TRANSCUTANEOUS  EL ECTRICAL  NE RVE ST IMULATION ON AC UPOINTS LA N
V ol. 78 - No. 8 MINERV
A ANESTESIOLOGICA 893
intensity of early rehabilitation after surgery, 20 
the mean VAS scores in both groups reached to 
a satisfactory level in this study during the ob-
servation period up to 48 h after surgery. Hence, 
it is not surprising that in this study, the major-
ity of patients in both groups were satisfied with 
postoperative analgesia but the patients who re-
ceived TENS consumed much less fentanyl.
The precise analgesic mechanism of TENS re-
mains largely unclear. However, according to the 
gate theory , TENS can suppress pain transmission 
mediated via sensory A-δ and C fibers.24 An elegant 
study of electroacupuncture, which is quite simi-
lar to TENS on acupoints, showed that optimal 
frequencies can release met-enkephalin and dyn-
orphins into the spinal fluid and cause synergistic 
pain relief with exogenous opioid medication. 25 
Ma et al.26 have reported that electroacupuncture 
reduces the levels of excitatory neurotransmitters 
responsible for pain modulation in the spinal cord 
in rats. It has also been reported that peripheral 
opioids were released after electroacupuncture 
in an inflammatory pain model in rats. 27 Inter-
estingly , pre-incisional electropuncture has been 
shown to be an effective preemptive analgesic in a 
number of studies.28, 29 The proposed mechanism 
has been that preincisional stimulation yields spe-
cific effects on the production of pain-producing 
substances (e.g., potassium and lactic acid) and 
the conductance of painful stimuli via κ-receptors 
by producing ir-dynorphin A.30
It has been well documented that there is a 
dose-response relationship between opioid used 
and its related side effects.31 Therefore, any non-
pharmacological methods that reduce the use 
of opioid medication are likely to be beneficial. 
Consistent with our observations, preoperative 
and postoperative TENS on specific acupoints 
have been reported to reduce opioid require-
ment for pain relief and its associated incidence 
of postoperative nausea and vomiting.32
It should be pointed out that the major limi-
tation of our study is not a truly double-blind 
study due to the nature of practicality.33 This fac-
tor may distort the results accuracy by patients’ 
unbiased judgment which is well documented in 
the literature.34 Nevertheless despite this limita-
tion, our result is in line with the other studies 
reported previously.35, 36
Discussion
Undoubtedly, it is very important for elderly 
patients to receive effective postoperative pain 
management, as this can reduce the occurrence 
of postoperative complications, such as cardiop-
ulmonary complications 3, 4  and postoperative 
cognitive dysfunction. 6 However, the adminis-
tration of systemic narcotic drugs for pain relief, 
commonly used in clinical practice, is not with-
out side effects such as cardio-respiratory depres-
sion, nausea and vomiting. It has been proposed 
that the best postoperative pain management is 
not a single technique or drug but a balanced 
and multimodal analgesia.19
Postoperative pain after hip fracture is proce-
dure-specific; THA is associated with lower pain 
compared with dynamic hip screws (DHSs) and 
intramedullary hip crews (IMHSs). 20 If non-
pharmacological and non-invasive methods can 
be used as complements to the primary modal-
ity of pain relief, the complications associated 
with administration of opioid and non-opoid 
drugs, as well as the dosages, could be decreased. 
Previous studies have indicated that the use of 
complementary medicine for pain management 
after surgery including acupuncture and TENS 
is effective.21, 22 In line with our study, previous 
studies of TENS have also suggested that alter-
nating low- and high-frequency, high intensity 
(9-20 mA) stimulation of acupoints is capable 
of decreasing postoperative pain and opioid con-
sumption after surgery.10, 13
It has been suggested that VAS scores should 
be less than 4 for satisfactory postoperative pain 
relief.23 Although both groups patients experi-
enced more pain at 24 h than at 48 h postopera-
tively which is likely to be due to frequency and 
T able III.—Assessment of blinding.
Answer Group A (N.=30) Group Sham (N.=30)
TENS was true 27 (90) 24 (80)
TENS was sham 2 (6.7) 4 (13.3)
Unsure 1 (3.3) 2 (6.7)
Ready to re-experience 
TENS
27 (90) 24 (80)
There was no difference in both groups in assessment of blinding. 
Values are numbers of patients (%). Group Acu: PCA+TENS on acu-
points; Group Sham: PCA+Sham TENS on acupoints.
MINERVA MEDICACOPYRIGHT®
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies
(either sporadically or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other
means which may allow access to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is
not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover, overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo ,
or other proprietary information of the Publisher.
--- PAGE 8 ---
LAN TRA NSCUTANEOUS EL ECTRICAL  NE RVE ST IMULATION ON AC UPOINTS
894 MINERV A ANESTESIOLOGICA August 2012
 8. Wang Y, Sands LP , Vaurio L, Mullen EA, Leung JM. The 
effects 
of postoperative pain and its management on post-
operative cognitive dysfunction. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 
2007;15: 50-9.
 9. Pöpping 
DM, Zahn PK, Van Aken HK, Dasch B, Boche 
R, Pogatzki-Zahn EM. Effectiveness and safety of post-
operative pain management: a survey of 18 925 consecu-
tive patients between 1998 and 2006 (2nd revision): a 
database analysis of prospectively raised data. Br J Anaesth 
2008;101:832-40.
10. Chen L, 
T ang J, White PF , Sloninsky A, Wender RH, Na-
ruse R et al. The effect of location of transcutaneous elec-
trical nerve stimulation on postoperative opioid analgesic 
requirement: acupoint versus nonacupoint stimulation. 
Anesth Analg 1998;87:1129-34.
11. Br
eit R, Van der Wall H. T ranscutaneous electrical nerve 
stimulation for postoperative pain relief after total knee ar-
throplasty. J Arthroplasty 2004;19:45-8.
12. Zárate 
E, Mingus M, White PF , Chiu JW , Scuderi P , Losko-
ta W et al. The use of transcutaneous acupoint electrical 
stimulation for preventing nausea and vomiting after lapar-
oscopic surgery. Anesth Analg 2001;92:629-35.
13. Wang 
B, T ang J, White PF , Naruse R, Sloninsky A, Kariger 
R et al. Effect of the intensity of transcutaneous acupoint 
electrical stimulation on the postoperative analgesic re-
quirement. Anesth Analg 1997;85:406-13.
14. Gan 
TJ, Jiao KR, Zenn M, Georgiade G, Georgiade G. 
A randomized controlled comparison of electro-acupoint 
stimulation or ondansetron versus placebo for the preven-
tion of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg 
2004;99:1070-5.
15. Dhesi 
SS, Hurley RW . The neurobiology of pain. In: T ol-
lison CD, Saterthwaite JR, T ollison JW , editors. Practical 
pain managemen. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2002. p. 1-25.
16. Malan 
TP Jr, Marsh G, Hakki SI, Grossman E, T raylor L, 
Hubbard RC et al. Parecoxib sodium, a parenteral cyclooxy-
genase 2 selective inhibitor, improves morphine analgesia 
and is opioid-sparing following total hip arthroplasty. An-
esthesiology 2003;98:950-6.
17. Clarke 
H, Pereira S, Kennedy D, Andrion J, Mitsakakis N, 
Gollish J et al. Adding gabapentin to a multimodal regimen 
does not reduce acute pain, opioid consumption or chronic 
pain after total hip arthroplasty. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 
2009;53:1073-83.
18. Keïta 
H, Geachan N, Dahmani S, Couderc E, Armand C, 
Quazza M et al. Comparison between patient-controlled 
analgesia and subcutaneous morphine in elderly patients 
after total hip replacement. Br J Anaesth 2003;90:53-7.
19. Peters 
CL, Shirley B, Erickson J. The effect of a new mul-
timodal perioperative anesthetic regimen on postoperative 
pain, side effects, rehabilitation, and length of hospital stay 
after total joint arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty 2006;21:132-8.
20. Foss 
NB, Kristensen MT , Palm H, Kehlet H. Postoperative 
pain after hip fracture is procedure specific. Br J Anaesth 
2009;102:111-6.
21. Holz
er A, Leitgeb U, Spacek A, Wenzl R, Herkner H, Ket-
tner S Auricular acupuncture for postoperative pain after 
gynecological surgery: a randomized controlled trail. Min-
erva Anestesiol 2011;77:298-304.
22. Unterrainer 
AF , Friedrich C, Krenn MH, Piotrowski WP , 
Golaszewski SM, Hitzl W . Postoperative and preincisional 
electrical nerve stimulation TENS reduce postoperative 
opioid requirement after major spinal surgery. J Neurosurg 
Anesthesiol 2010;22:1-5.
23. Rawal N, 
Berggren L. Organization of acute pain services: a 
low-cost model. Pain 1994;57:117-123.
24. Winnie 
A. The gate control theory of pain--revisited. Reg 
Anesth 1989; 14: 207.
25. Han 
JS, Chen XH, Sun SL, Xu XJ, Yuan Y, Yan SC et al. 
Effect of low- and high-frequency TENS on Met-enkepha-
Conclusions
Use of TENS on six specific acupoints in eld-
erly patients undergoing total hip arthroplasty is 
a non-invasive, non-pharmacological, and sim-
ple technique for use in postoperative analgesia 
and is associated with reductions in opioid-re-
lated side effects. However, the relatively small 
sample size is a major limitation of this study. 
Further studies with larger sample size together 
with other types of surgery are needed to fully 
evaluate the efficacy of TENS for postoperative 
pain relief.
Key messages
 — T ranscutaneous 
electrical nerve stim-
ulation (TENS) has been considered as a 
complementary intervention to relief various 
types of pain.
 — This randomiz
ed controlled trial 
aimed to investigate the effect of TENS on 
acupoints for postoperative analgesia follow-
ing total hip arthroplasty (THA) in elderly 
patients.
 — Our 
data indicate that TENS can re-
duce postoperative analgesic requirement in 
elderly and hence decrease analgesic opioid 
related side effects.
Reference
 1. Berend KR, Lombardi AV Jr, Mallory TH. Rapid recovery 
pr
otocol for peri-operative care of total hip and total knee 
arthroplasty patients. Surg T echnol Int 2004;13:239-47.
 2. Apfelbaum 
JL, Chen C, Mehta SS, Gan TJ. Postoperative 
pain experience: results from a national survey suggest post-
operative pain continues to be undermanaged. Anesth An-
alg 2003;97:534-40.
 3. Carr DB, 
Goudas LC. Acute pain. Lancet 1999;353:2051-
8.
 4. Canet J, 
Mazo V . Postoperative pulmonary complications. 
Minerva Anestesiol 2010;76:138-43.
 5. Radtke FM, 
Franck M, Hagemann L, Seeling M, Wernecke 
KD, Spies CD. Risk factors for inadequate emergence after 
anesthesia: emergence delirium and hypoactive emergence. 
Minerva Anestesiol 2010;76:394-403.
 6. Edelstein 
DM, Aharonoff GB, Karp A, Capla EL, Zuck-
erman JD, Koval KJ. Effect of postoperative delirium 
on outcome after hip fracture. Clin Orthop Relat Res 
2004;422:195-200.
 7. Gagliese 
L, Jackson M, Ritvo P , Wowk A, Katz J. Age is not 
an impediment to effective use of patient-controlled analge-
sia by surgical patients. Anesthesiology 2000;93:601-10.
MINERVA MEDICACOPYRIGHT®
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies
(either sporadically or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other
means which may allow access to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is
not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover, overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo ,
or other proprietary information of the Publisher.
--- PAGE 9 ---
TRANSCUTANEOUS  EL ECTRICAL  NE RVE ST IMULATION ON AC UPOINTS LA N
V ol. 78 - No. 8 MINERV
A ANESTESIOLOGICA 895
32. Wang XQ, Yu JL, Du ZY, Xu R, Jiang CC, Gao X. Electroa-
cupoint 
stimulation for postoperative nausea and vomiting 
in patients undergoing supratentorial craniotomy. J Neuro-
surg Anesthesiol 2010;22:128-31.
33. Fr
egni F , Imamura M, Chien HF , Lew HL, Boggio P , 
Kaptchuk TJ et al. Challenges and recommendations for 
placebo controls in randomized trials in physical and re-
habilitation medicine: a report of the international pla-
cebo symposium working group. Am J Phys Med Rehabil 
2010;89:160-72.
34. Bennett 
MI, Hughes N, Johnson MI. Methodological qual-
ity in randomised controlled trials of transcutaneous electric 
nerve stimulation for pain: Low fidelity may explain nega-
tive findings. Pain 2011;152:1226-32.
35. Yeh 
ML, Chung YC, Chen KM, T sou MY, Chen HH. 
Acupoint electrical stimulation reduces acute postoperative 
pain in surgical patients with patient-controlled analgesia: 
a randomized controlled study. Altern Ther Health Med 
2010;16:10-8.
36. Coura LE, 
Manoel CH, Poffo R, Bedin A, Westphal GA. 
Randomised, controlled study of preoperative electroacu-
puncture for postoperative pain control after cardiac sur-
gery. Acupunct Med 2011;29:16-20.
lin-Arg-Phe and dynorphin A immunoreactivity in human 
lumbar CSF . Pain 1991;47:295-8.
26. Ma 
C, Li CX, Yi JL, Yan LP . Effects of electroacupuncture 
on glutamate and aspartic acid contents in the dorsal root 
ganglion and spinal cord in rats with neuropathic pain. 
Zhen Ci Yan Jiu 2008;33:250-4.
27. Zhang GG, 
Yu C, Lee W , Lao L, Ren K, Berman BM. In-
volvement of peripheral opioid mechanisms in electroacu-
puncture analgesia. Explore (NY) 2005;1:365-71.
28. Lin JG, 
Lo MW , Wen YR, Hsieh CL, T sai SK, Sun WZ. 
The effect of high and low frequency electroacupuncture in 
pain after lower abdominal surgery. Pain 2002;99:509-14.
29. Sim 
CK, Xu PC, Pua HL, Zhang G, Lee TL. Effects of 
electroacupuncture on intraoperative and postoperative an-
algesic requirement. Acupunct Med 2002;20:56-65.
30. Huge 
V , Rammes G, Beyer A, Zieglgansberger W , Azad 
SC. Activation of kappa opioid receptors decreases synaptic 
transmission and inhibits long-term potentiation in the ba-
solateral amygdala of the mouse. Eur J Pain 2009;13:124-9.
31. Zhao SZ, 
Chung F , Hanna DB, Raymundo AL, Cheung 
RY, Chen C. Dose-response relationship between opioid 
use and adverse effects after ambulatory surgery. J Pain 
Symptom Manage 2004;28:35-46.
This work has been presented as an abstract in the summer meeting of the Anaesthetic Research Society, Liverpool, June 2011, UK.
Funding—None.
Conflicts of interest.—None.
Received on July 7, 2011 - Accepted for publication on April 16, 2012.
Corresponding author: T .-L. Wang, MD, Prof. Department of Anesthesiology, Xuan Wu Hospital, Capital Medical University, No.45 
Changchun Street, Xuan Wu District, Beijing, 100053, China. E-mail: w_tl5595@hotmail.com
This article is freely available at www.minervamedica.it
MINERVA MEDICACOPYRIGHT®
This document is protected by international copyright laws. No additional reproduction is authorized. It is permitted for personal use to download and save only one file and print only one copy of this Article. It is not permitted to make additional copies
(either sporadically or systematically, either printed or electronic) of the Article for any purpose. It is not permitted to distribute the electronic copy of the article through online internet and/or intranet file sharing systems, electronic mailing or any other
means which may allow access to the Article. The use of all or any part of the Article for any Commercial Use is not permitted. The creation of derivative works from the Article is not permitted. The production of reprints for personal or commercial use is
not permitted. It is not permitted to remove, cover, overlay, obscure, block, or change any copyright notices or terms of use which the Publisher may post on the Article. It is not permitted to frame or use framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo ,
or other proprietary information of the Publisher.