
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
Effect of intraoperative electroacupuncture on
postoperative pain, analgesic requirements, nausea
and sedation: a randomised controlled trial
Mohanned El-Rakshy, Sue C Clark, James Thompson, Moe Thant
Scunthorpe General Hospital,
North Lincolnshire, UK
Correspondence to:
M El-Rakshy, Scunthorpe
General Hospital, North
Lincolnshire, UK; elrakshy@
btinternet.com
ABSTRACT
Background: Acupuncture has potential value in produ-
cing analgesia in the postoperative period, but previous
trials have inconsistent results. We aimed to study the
effect of electroacupuncture on pain and nausea and the
requirement for postoperative analgesia via patient-
controlled analgesia.
Method: 107 patients who were undergoing abdominal
hysterectomy or laparascopic cholecystectomy were
randomised to receive either electroacupuncture (n = 56)
or no additional treatment (n = 46) during the operative
period. We measured the use of patient-controlled
analgesia and time in recovery as well as pain,
postoperative nausea and vomiting, and sedation. 102
patients were included in the analysis. The majority of
patients were female: the laparoscopic cholecystectomy
group included 10 males. Adhesive dressings were placed
over all acupuncture points in both groups, to ensure
blinding of patients and assessors during the recovery
period.
Results: The electroacupuncture group had a longer
duration of operation but the difference was not
statistically significant. There were no significant differ-
ences between the groups for the requirement for
patient-controlled analgesia or total time in recovery. Pain
scores were marginally lower in the acupuncture group,
but not significantly, and there were no differences
between the groups in nausea or sedation scores.
Conclusion: Electroacupuncture at 10 Hz given under
general anaesthetic has no effect on postoperative
nausea or analgesic requirement. Future studies should
investigate acupuncture given before or after surgery.
Postoperative pain is an inevitable result of injury
and its advantage in terms of survival is presum-
ably to prevent movement and thereby hasten
healing of the wound. However, pain distresses the
patient and any lack of activity and movement
increase the risk of postoperative deep venous
thrombosis and chest infection. Postoperative pain
is mainly nociceptive, but central sensitisation also
occurs. At the periphery, inflammatory mediators
(prostaglandins, histamine, serotonin, bradykinin
and
substance
P)
increase
the
sensitivity
of
nociceptors. Central sensitisation occurs as a result
of functional reorganisation in the dorsal horn of
the spinal cord. Both these processes result in an
exaggerated response to noxious stimuli, spread of
hyper-responsiveness
to
non-injured
tissue
in
adjacent spinal segments, and reduction in the
pain threshold.
Much attention has been paid to the importance
of achieving adequate analgesia throughout the
operative period, with widespread use of patient-
controlled analgesia. But this carries the potential
risks of side effects of the drugs, so an effective
non-drug alternative such as acupuncture would be
welcome.
The mechanisms of the effects of acupuncture
stimulation on the pathways of the central nervous
system
are
increasingly
well
understood,1
and
it seems that these mechanisms are potentially
highly appropriate for treating postoperative pain.
Considering the good safety record of acupuncture
and the lack of serious side effects, acupuncture is a
candidate for contributing to postoperative pain
management. A number of studies have shown
that acupuncture reduces postoperative pain, both
in oral and general surgery.2–5 However, other
studies have not shown acupuncture to be effective
in treatment of postoperative nausea and vomiting
(PONV),6–9 or postoperative pain.10 This contro-
versy was the stimulus for our study, which aims
at investigating the effect of intraoperative electro-
acupuncture on postoperative pain, PONV and
sedation in patients undergoing laparoscopic cho-
lecystectomy or abdominal hysterectomy.
METHOD
Study design
A randomised, double-blind, comparative study
was conducted in Scunthorpe & Goole Hospitals.
Patients all received patient-controlled analgesia
(PCA), either with acupuncture (PCA + acupunc-
ture) or without acupuncture (PCA alone). Double
blinding was achieved by placing adhesive dres-
sings on all acupuncture sites in all patients, to
ensure that neither the patients themselves nor the
staff caring for the patients knew which treatment
each
patient
received.
The
anaesthetist
who
delivered the acupuncture was not involved in
the assessment of the patients.
Patients were allocated to treatment groups on
the basis of a computer-generated randomisation
list using Statistical Package for Social Sciences
(SPSS). In consecutive order, patients were allo-
cated to one or other group after consulting the
list. All consenting patients who were undergoing
elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy or abdom-
inal
hysterectomy
were
approached
by
the
researchers
to
be
recruited
into
the
study.
Patients were given full information about the
study, including the method of acupuncture. All
consenting patients were aware that they might or
might not have acupuncture. All patients were also
given an information booklet on how to use a PCA
pump.
Original paper
Acupunct Med 2009;27:9–12. doi:10.1136/aim.2008.000075
9


=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
Male or female patients were included if they were at least
18 years of age and had an American Society of Anaesthesiology
score of either I or II. All patients gave written informed consent
prior to entering the study.
Patients were excluded from the study if they were pregnant
(pregnancy test was performed on all women of childbearing
potential when considered for the study), diagnosed with a
coagulopathy, over the age of 70 years, or undergoing surgery
additional to the intended operation.
Assessments
The recovery time was measured in both groups from the time
the patient arrived in the recovery room until the patient was
able to respond to a verbal command. Pain was measured using
a four-point rating scale in response to a direct question by the
nurse: 0 = no pain; 1 = mild pain; 2 = moderate pain; and
3 = severe pain. Observations were made at intervals of 1 h for
the first 4 h; 2 h for the next 12 h; and 4 h for the remaining
8 h. PONV was measured using a dichotomous measure applied
by the nurse at the same time: 0 = no PONV; 1 = presence of
PONV. Sedation was measured using a sedation score: 0 =
awake; 1 = dozing intermittently; 2 = mostly sleeping; and
3 = difficult to waken.
During the first 24 h of postoperative care, all patients
received morphine sulphate via the PCA route. The concentra-
tion of morphine in the PCA pump was 1 mg/ml; the lock-out
time was 5 minutes. Any medication which the patient was
taking prior to surgery was recommenced as soon as was
practicable, in line with the individual treatment regime. Any
such medications that are classed as analgesics were documen-
ted in the study and taken into account in discussing the results
and making recommendations at the end of the study.
The study was approved by the local ethics committee.
Patients were informed that they had the right to withdraw
from the study at any time for any reason, without prejudice to
their treatment. A patient could also be withdrawn from the
study at the researcher’s discretion at any time should they feel
it would be to the patient’s detriment to continue, or if they no
longer met the inclusion criteria.
Study protocol
All
patients
who
were scheduled
to
have
surgery
were
approached and given time to read the information sheet, and
entered into the study after signing the consent form. Consent
was obtained the night before the operation if the patient was
in the ward, or before the preoperative visit by the anaesthetist.
The admitting nurse taught the patient how to use the PCA
pump, as is standard practice.
All anaesthetists involved in the study agreed on a standard
premedication that was given to all patients prior to surgery:
diazepam 5–10 mg was given orally 1 h before operationaccording
to the weight of the patient (5 mg for patients below 60 kg and
10 mg for patients above 60 kg). Patients were anaesthetised by
one of the three authors or by another anaesthetist not involved in
the study, following a standardised anaesthetic protocol. The
anaesthetists were not blinded to the patient’s group allocation,
but were not involved in the assessment of the patients. Propofol
was the induction agent, and a standard dose of droperidol 1 mg
was given to all patients as a baseline antiemetic. Tracheal
intubation was facilitated by using atracurium, or another muscle
relaxant (vecuronium, rocuronium or cisatracurium), in dosage
according to the body weight. Anaesthesia was maintained by
nitrousoxide50–60%,oxygen40–50%andisoflurane1–2%.Atthe
end of the operation, muscle relaxation was reversed using a
suitable dose of neostigmine and glycopyrrolate. Intravenous
morphine was given intraoperatively just before skin incision,
100 mg/kg body weight.
Patients who were randomised to receive acupuncture had
the acupuncture needles inserted after induction of anaesthesia.
In patients undergoing hysterectomy the following points were
used: GV2, GV4 in the midline and BL32, BL23, LI4 and PC6,
bilaterally. In patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystect-
omy, the following points were used: LR3, SP6, LI4 and PC6, all
bilaterally. The points were selected on the bases of guidelines
Figure 1
Flow chart of the study.
Figure 2
Distribution of pain scores in different categories of severity in
the two groups.
Figure 3
Distribution of sedation scores in different categories in the
two groups.
Original paper
10
Acupunct Med 2009;27:9–12. doi:10.1136/aim.2008.000075


=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
from Chaitow.11 Needles (size 1 or 0.16 6 30 mm, Seirin) were
attached to the acupuncture stimulator (Medical Electro-
Acupuncture Unit, IC-4107, RDG Medical Ltd, Croydon, UK)
for the duration of the operation. The needles were connected in
the following pairs: GV2 with BL32, GV4 with BL23, LI4 with
PC6, and LR3 with SP6. The frequency used was 10 Hz, and the
intensity was 7/10 on the intensity scale of the electroacu-
puncture
unit.
Occasional
muscle
twitches
were
noticed
(suggesting that muscle relaxation was not optimal). After the
needles were connected to the electroacupuncture stimulator,
they were secured by adhesive tape. No local anaesthetics were
used at the end of surgery. Stimulation was stopped and needles
removed before the patient was transferred to the recovery
room.
In the recovery room, patients were attached to the PCA
pump, and all observations were documented according to the
patient booklet. The recovery nurse who was assessing the
patient was blinded to the technique, since patients in both
groups came to the recovery room with a dressing covering the
acupuncture point.
Patients
were
transferred
to
the
General
Surgical
or
Gynaecological wards for the remainder of their stay. All
observations were performed as standard for the postoperative
period for these procedures.
Statistical methods
The primary outcome for comparing the groups was the mean
dose (mg) of morphine used. This was calculated for 4 h and for
24 h in order to be able to detect any time-related effects of
acupuncture. All continuous data showed a positive skew and
therefore a non-parametric test (Mann–Whitney U test) was
used. The categorical data (rating scales for pain and nausea and
vomiting) were analysed by chi-square test and Fisher’s exact
tests. The level of significance was set at p = 0.05.
Unfortunately the statistician became ill after performing the
data entry and initial analysis. The original data remained
inaccessible, including baseline variables such as age, the
progression of use of analgesic drugs, pain score and PONV
score over time, and results for the two operations separately.
This report is written on the basis of the initial print-out
generated by SPSS; data were re-entered into SPSS V.15.0 and
Mann–Whitney U tests for non-parametric data were con-
ducted to compare all outcomes.
RESULTS
The trial was conducted in 1999. A total of 107 patients were
included (see fig 1). Five patients were withdrawn: two patients in
the PCA + acupuncture group scheduled for laparoscopic
cholecystectomy withdrew their consent because they did not
want to have acupuncture. Three patients, all in the PCA alone
group (one with abdominal hysterectomy, and two with laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy) were withdrawn either because they
received other forms of analgesia such as an epidural or because of a
change in the scheduled procedure, for example from laparoscopic
cholecystectomy to open surgery when it proved difficult to
remove the gall bladder laparoscopically. Therefore, in total 102
patients completed the study, distributed as shown in table 1.
A total of 58 patients were analysed in the PCA arm and 44 in
the PCA + acupuncture arm. Ninety-two patients were female;
50 underwent abdominal hysterectomy and 42 underwent
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. There were 10 male patients in
the laparoscopic cholecystectomy group; eight were randomised
to PCA alone.
The operation time for the PCA + acupuncture group was
20 minutes longer than the PCA group, but the difference was
not significant (table 2). There were no significant differences
between the groups for use of PCA at different periods, or for
total
requirement
for
analgesic
medication.
The
PCA
+
acupuncture group did not spend less time in recovery, and
required PCA for an additional 13 h, though the difference was
not significant.
Pain scores are shown in table 3 and fig 2, but unfortunately
the exact measurement points are unknown because of the
problems with the analysis described above. Although no
patients in the PCA + acupuncture group scored greater than
1, the difference between the groups was not significant (chi
square = 5.360, degrees of freedom (df) = 3, p = 0.147). For
PONV scores, 87.5% of the PCA group had no symptoms
compared with 89.1% in the PCA + acupuncture group (chi
square = 0.799, df = 1, p = 0.065). Similarly for sedation scores
(fig 3), the difference was not statistically different (chi
square = 0.751, df = 2, p = 0.574).
DISCUSSION
This
study
found
no
significant
effect
of
intraoperative
electroacupuncture at 10 Hz in reducing postoperative require-
ment for PCA, nor time to recovery, nor scores for pain, nausea
and vomiting or sedation in the postoperative period. This
finding is limited by the fact that the patients in the
Table 1
Patients included in the analysis, by group, sex and operation
Female (n = 92)
Male (n = 10)
Totals
PCA
PCA +
acupuncture
PCA
PCA +
acupuncture
Abdominal hysterectomy
27
23
50
Laparoscopic
cholecystectomy
29
13
2
8
52
Totals
56
36
2
8
102
PCA, patient-controlled analgesia.
Table 2
Main outcomes of study comparing patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) alone and PCA +
acupuncture
PCA
PCA + acupuncture
p Value*
No
Mean (SD)
No
Mean (SD)
Time PCA in use, h
46
47.0 (13.3)
38
60.1 (66.6)
0.459
Total time in recovery, h
48
59.0 (13.8)
40
59.6 (16.8)
0.983
PCA used in recovery, mg
52
3.6 (3.3)
40
4.0 (2.7)
0.070
Total analgesia in first 4 h, mg
53
13.2 (8.6)
40
13.4 (7.5)
0.675
Total analgesia in 24 h, mg
53
36.9 (18.0)
42
35.3 (18.0)
0.961
Total operation time, minutes
54
88.0 (33.0)
44
108.2 (65.8)
0.115
*Mann–Whitney U test.
Original paper
Acupunct Med 2009;27:9–12. doi:10.1136/aim.2008.000075
11


=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
acupuncture group experienced longer operations, though the
difference was not significant. There was a non-significant
trend towards patients in the PCA + acupuncture group
experiencing less pain. Other potential postoperative benefits
of
acupuncture
include
patient
satisfaction,
reduction
in
paralytic ileus or early discharge of the patient, but these were
not measured in this study.
The study has the strengths of rigorous design including
blinding of assessors, and quality of acupuncture; the research-
ers who provided the acupuncture are experienced, medically
qualified acupuncturists and used a consistent technique.
Our results are somewhat limited by loss of access to the data
from different time periods, which might show interesting
differences. Another potentially important limitation to our
findings is that the two groups were not homogenous for sex or
the type of surgery, and it is possible, for example, that patients
who underwent the relatively mild stimulus of laparoscopy
experienced little postoperative pain, so no effect of acupunc-
ture could be shown. The results for each operation should be
analysed separately, but in this study the data were not
collected separately.
Another limitation of this study is the choice of a single
frequency of 10 Hz. It is possible that a frequency of 2–4 Hz
would release endorphins more effectively than 10 Hz.12 Low
frequency is associated with slow onset of analgesia, while high
frequency (50–200 Hz) has rapid onset but short duration. There
is no consensuson the optimumfrequency, waveform or intensity
for postoperative analgesia. The frequency used (10 Hz) was
chosen with the intention of having features of both, but instead
may have not been appropriate for releasing neurotransmitters.
Different results might be achieved with the use of dense disperse
mode of frequency (eg alternating 2 and 80 Hz) to stimulate the
release of dynorphin as well as endorphin.
The main conclusion of the study is that it seems likely that
electroacupuncture is ineffective when given during general
anaesthesia, as previously suggested,8 9 and this study confirms
the results of other studies which did not find acupuncture
effective if applied under anaesthetic.6–9 The main value of our
study, then, would be to encourage other researchers to
investigate the effectiveness of acupuncture either before or
after surgery, and not actually during general anaesthesia. In the
studies that found acupuncture effective, the treatment was
given preoperatively.4 5 13 14
The known mechanisms of acupuncture make it a good
candidate for postoperative analgesia. Acupuncture stimulates
the A delta nerve fibres and thereby activates three centres: the
spinal cord, midbrain, and hypothalamic-pituitary axis, to cause
analgesia. At the spinal site, enkephalin and dynorphin are
released by stimulation at low frequency and block incoming
nociceptive signals. Other transmitters (eg gamma-aminobuty-
ric acid) may be released by stimulation at high frequency.1 In
the midbrain, beta endorphin is released, which activates the
descending system thus inhibiting spinal cord pain transmission
through the effect of the monoamines, serotonin and nor-
adrenaline. In the midbrain there is also a neuronal circuit that
bypasses the endorphinergic links at high-frequency stimula-
tion.1 Finally at the hypothalamic-pituitary axis, acupuncture
may stimulate the pituitary to release beta endorphin to cause
analgesia at a distance, and adrinocorticotropic hormone which
stimulates the adrenal gland to secrete the natural steroids
which have an anti-inflammatory effect. Also, the hypothala-
mus spends axons to the midbrain, activating the descending
inhibitory system. The hypothalamus may be activated only by
low-frequency stimulation.
In their recent systematic review of 15 clinical trials, Sun and
colleagues showed that, compared with sham acupuncture,
acupuncture was associated with reduced morphine consump-
tion, reduced pain scores and a lower incidence of opioid-related
side effects such as nausea, dizziness, sedation, pruritus and
urinary retention.15 The authors concluded that perioperative
acupuncture may be a useful adjunct for acute postoperative
pain management.
In conclusion, acupuncture given under general anaesthesia is
unlikely to have a clinically useful effect, but research into
preoperativeacupunctureislikelytoleadtoimprovedpatient care.
Acknowledgements: This study was submitted in partial fulfilment of the Masters
degree in pain management from the University of Wales College of Medicine, and the
authors would like to thank Ann Taylor, co-ordinator. I would like to thank Northern
Lincolnshire and Goole NHS Hospitals Trust for offering me all the help and support
needed to finish the study.
Competing interests: None.
Ethics approval: The study was approved by the local ethics committee.
Patient consent: Obtained.
REFERENCES
1.
Stux G, Pomeranz B. Basics of acupuncture. 2nd edn. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1991.
2.
Wang FH, Chen CL, Chen MCY, et al. Auricular electroacupuncture for post
thoracectomy pain. Chin Med J 1988;41:349–56.
3.
Wang X. Electroimpulse acupuncture treatment of 110 cases of abdominal pain as a
sequela of abdominal surgery. J Tradit Chin Med 1988;8:269–70.
4.
Christensen PA, Rotne M, Vedelsdal R, et al. Electroacupuncture in anaesthesia for
hysterectomy. Br J Anaesth 1993;71:835–8.
5.
Lao L, Bergman S, Langenberg P, et al. Efficacy of Chinese acupuncture on
postoperative oral surgery pain. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
1995;79:423–8.
6.
Weightman WM, Zacharias M, Herbison P. Traditional Chinese acupuncture as an
antiemetic. BMJ 1987;295:1379–80.
7.
Dundee JW, Milligan KR, Mckay AC. Influence of intraoperative acupuncture and
droperidol in postoperative emesis. Br J Anaesth 1988;61:117–18.
8.
Yentis SM, Bissonnette B. P6 acupuncture and postoperative vomiting after
tonsillectomy in children. Br J Anaesth 1991;67:779–80.
9.
Yentis SM, Bissonnette B. Ineffectiveness of acupuncture and droperidol in preventing
vomiting following strabismus repair in children. Can J Anaesth 1992;39:151–4.
10.
Ekblom A, Hansson P, Thomsson M, et al. Increased postoperative pain and
consumption of analgesics following acupuncture. Pain 1991;44:241–7.
11.
Chaitow L. The acupuncture treatment of pain. Wellingborough: Thorsons Publishing
Group, 1983.
12.
Han J, Terenius L. Neurochemical basis of acupuncture analgesia. Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol 1982;22:192–220.
13.
Sim CK, Xu PC, Pua HL, et al. Effects of electroacupuncture on intraoperative and
postoperative analgesic requirement. Acupunct Med 2002;20:56–65.
14.
Streitberger K, Ezzo J, Schneider A. Acupuncture for nausea and vomiting: an update
of clinical and experimental studies. Autonom Neurosci 2006;129:107–17.
15.
Sun Y, Gan TJ, Dubose JW, et al. Acupuncture and related techniques for
postoperative pain: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Br J Anaesth
2008;101:151–60.
Table 3
Distribution of pain scores for the two groups
0
1
2
3
Total
PCA
32
18
5
1
56
PCA + acupuncture
31
15
0
0
46
PCA, patient-controlled analgesia.
Summary points
c Previous trials of acupuncture for postoperative analgesia have
had inconsistent results
c We found no effect of 10 Hz electroacupuncture during
surgery
c Acupuncture given under general anaesthesia is unlikely to
have effects on postoperative pain
Original paper
12
Acupunct Med 2009;27:9–12. doi:10.1136/aim.2008.000075
